Documented how to migrate a live cluster from chunks to blocks (#2956)
cortexproject/cortex: docs/blocks-storage/migrate-from-chunks-to-blocks.md

---
title: "Migrate Cortex cluster from chunks to blocks"
linkTitle: "Migrate Cortex cluster from chunks to blocks"
weight: 5
slug: migrate-cortex-cluster-from-chunks-to-blocks
---

This article describes how to migrate existing Cortex cluster from chunks storage to blocks storage,
and highlight possible issues you may encounter in the process.

> _This document replaces the [Cortex proposal](https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/proposals/ingesters-migration/),

Reviewer: I would update the proposal to mention to not use that proposal as migration reference, but link this new doc page.

To avoid this problem, we need to temporarily disable this feature by setting `-querier.ingester-streaming=false`.
After migration is complete (i.e. all ingesters are running blocks only), this can be turned back to true, which is the default value.

### Query-frontend

Query-frontend needs to be reconfigured as follow:

- `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries=false`

#### `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries=false`

Query frontend has an option `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries` to split some incoming queries into multiple queries based on sharding factor used in v11 schema of chunk storage.
As the description implies, it only works when using chunks storage.
During and after the migration to blocks (and also after possible rollback), this option needs to be disabled otherwise query-frontend will generate queries that cannot be satisfied by blocks.

### Compactor and Store-gateway

[Compactor](./compactor.md) and [store-gateway](./store-gateway.md) services should be deployed and successfully up and running before migrating ingesters.

## Step 2: Ingesters migration

> We have developed a script available in Cortex [`tools/migrate-ingester-statefulsets.sh`](https://github.com/cortexproject/cortex/blob/master/tools/migrate-ingester-statefulsets.sh) to migrate ingesters between two StatefulSets, shutting down ingesters one by one.

Reviewer: The missing part here is that it assumes that the new StatefulSet has been created with the right configuration and the number of replicas set to 0. I believe this should be covered adding a section to the preparation phase (above).

After rollback, chunk-ingesters replayed their old Write-Ahead-Log, thus loading old chunks into memory.
WAL doesn't remember whether these old chunks were already flushed or not, so they are flushed again.
Until that flush happens, Cortex reports those chunks as unflushed, which may trigger some alerts (via `cortex_oldest_unflushed_chunk_timestamp_seconds` metric).

## Appendix

### Jsonnet config

This section shows how to use [cortex-jsonnet](https://github.com/grafana/cortex-jsonnet) to configure additional services.

We will assume that `main.jsonnet` is main configuration for the cluster, that also imports `temp.jsonnet` – with our temporary configuration for migration.

In `main.jsonnet` we have something like this:

```jsonnet
local cortex = import 'cortex/cortex.libsonnet';
local wal = import 'cortex/wal.libsonnet';
local temp = import 'temp.jsonnet';

// Note that 'tsdb' is not imported here.
cortex + wal + temp {
  _images+:: (import 'images.libsonnet'),

  _config+:: {
    cluster: 'k8s-cluster',
    namespace: 'k8s-namespace',

...
```

To configure querier to use secondary store for querying, we need to add:

```
    querier_second_storage_engine: 'blocks',

>     storage_tsdb_bucket_name: 'bucket-for-storing-blocks',

Reviewer: I recently renamed it.

```suggestion
    blocks_storage_bucket_name: 'bucket-for-storing-blocks',
```

weight: 5
slug: migrate-cortex-cluster-from-chunks-to-blocks
---

This article describes how to migrate existing Cortex cluster from chunks storage to blocks storage,
and highlight possible issues you may encounter in the process.

_This document replaces the [Cortex proposal](https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/proposals/ingesters-migration/),
which was written before support for migration was in place._

## Introduction

This article **assumes** that:

- Cortex cluster is managed by Kubernetes
- Cortex is using chunks storage
- Ingesters are using WAL

_If your ingesters are not using WAL, the documented procedure will still apply, but the presented migration script will not work properly without changes, as it assumes that ingesters are managed via StatefulSet._

The migration procedure is composed by 3 steps:

1. [Preparation](#step-1-preparation)
1. [Ingesters migration](#step-2-ingesters-migration)
1. [Cleanup](#step-3-cleanup)

_In case of any issue during or after the migration, this document also outlines a [Rollback](#rollback) strategy._

## Step 1: Preparation

Before starting the migration of ingesters, we need to prepare other services.

### Querier and Ruler

> _Everything discussed for querier applies to ruler as well, since it shares querier configuration – options prefix is `querier` even when used by ruler._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Everything discussed for querier applies to ruler as well, since it shares querier configuration – CLI flags prefix is `-querier` even when used by ruler._
```

Querier and ruler need to be reconfigured as follow:

- `-querier.second-store-engine=blocks`
- `-querier.query-store-after=0`
- `-querier.ingester-streaming=false`

#### `-querier.second-store-engine=blocks`

Querier (and ruler) needs to be reconfigured to query both chunks storage and blocks storage at the same time.
This is achieved by using `-querier.second-store-engine=blocks` option, and providing querier with full blocks configuration, but keeping "primary" store set to `-store.engine=chunks`.

#### `-querier.query-store-after=0`

Querier (and ruler) has an option `-querier.query-store-after` to query store only if query hits data older than some period of time.
For example, if ingesters keep 12h of data in memory, there is no need to hit the store for queries that only need last 1h of data.
During the migration, this flag needs to be set to 0, to make queriers always consult the store when handling queries.

> The reason is that after chunks ingesters shutdown, they can no longer return chunks from memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is that, during the ingesters migration, chunks will be flushed to the storage during the shutdown procedure of ingesters running the chunks storage and queriers need to fetch such chunks directly from storage.
```

Author: I've accepted all your feedback except this one. I've reworded my text, as I think the real reason is that old ingesters are replaced with new ones, which don't reload chunks from WAL. Please take a look and let me know if it makes sense. Thanks!

Reviewer: Your version is waaaaay more clear! 👏

Author: Thanks for your help with the PR!

#### `-querier.ingester-streaming=false`

Querier (and ruler) has a [bug](https://github.com/cortexproject/cortex/issues/2935) and doesn't properly
merge streamed results from chunks and blocks-based ingesters. Instead it only returns data from blocks- instesters.
To avoid this problem, we need to temporarily disable this feature by setting `-querier.ingester-streaming=false`.
After migration is complete (i.e. all ingesters are running blocks only), this can be turned back to true, which is the default value.

### Query-frontend

Query-frontend needs to be reconfigured as follow:

- `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries=false`

#### `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries=false`

Query frontend has an option `-querier.parallelise-shardable-queries` to split some incoming queries into multiple queries based on sharding factor used in v11 schema of chunk storage.
As the description implies, it only works when using chunks storage.

> During and after the migration to blocks (and also after possible rollback), this option needs to be disabled otherwise query-frontend will generate queries that cannot be satisfied by blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During and after the migration to blocks (and also after possible rollback), this option needs to be disabled otherwise query-frontend will generate queries that cannot be satisfied by blocks storage.
```

## Rollback

If rollback to chunks is needed for any reason, it is possible to use the same migration script with reversed arguments:

- Scale down ingesters StatefulSet running blocks storage
- Scale up ingesters StatefulSet running chunks storage

_Blocks ingesters support the same `/shutdown` endpoint for flushing data._

During the rollback, queriers and rulers need to use the same configuration changes as during migration. You should also make sure the following settings are applied:

- `-store.engine=chunks`
- `-querier.second-store-engine=blocks`
- `-querier.use-second-store-before-time` should not be set
- `-querier.ingester-streaming=false`

Once the rollback is complete, some configuration changes need to stay in place, because some data has already been stored to blocks:

- The query sharding in the query-frontend must be kept disabled, otherwise querying blocks will not work correctly
- `store-gateway` needs to keep running, otherwise querying blocks will fail
- `compactor` may be shutdown, after it has no more compaction work to do

Kubernetes resources related to the ingesters running the blocks storage may be deleted.

### Known issues

> After rollback, chunk-ingesters replayed their old Write-Ahead-Log, thus loading old chunks into memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After rollback, chunks ingesters will replay their old Write-Ahead-Log, thus loading old chunks into memory.
```

> WAL doesn't remember whether these old chunks were already flushed or not, so they are flushed again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAL doesn't remember whether these old chunks were already flushed or not, so they will be flushed again to the storage.
```

> Until that flush happens, Cortex reports those chunks as unflushed, which may trigger some alerts (via `cortex_oldest_unflushed_chunk_timestamp_seconds` metric).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until that flush happens, Cortex reports those chunks as unflushed, which may trigger some alerts based on the `cortex_oldest_unflushed_chunk_timestamp_seconds` metric.
```

As the description implies, it only works when using chunks storage.
During and after the migration to blocks (and also after possible rollback), this option needs to be disabled otherwise query-frontend will generate queries that cannot be satisfied by blocks.

### Compactor and Store-gateway

[Compactor](./compactor.md) and [store-gateway](./store-gateway.md) services should be deployed and successfully up and running before migrating ingesters.

## Step 2: Ingesters migration

We have developed a script available in Cortex [`tools/migrate-ingester-statefulsets.sh`](https://github.com/cortexproject/cortex/blob/master/tools/migrate-ingester-statefulsets.sh) to migrate ingesters between two StatefulSets, shutting down ingesters one by one.

It can be used like this:

```
$ tools/migrate-ingester-statefulsets.sh <namespace> <ingester-old> <ingester-new> <num-instances>
```

Where parameters are:
- `<namespace>`: Kubernetes namespace where the Cortex cluster is running
- `<ingester-old>`: name of the ingesters StatefulSet to scale down (running chunks storage)
- `<ingester-new>`: name of the ingesters StatefulSet to scale up (running blocks storage)

> - `<num-instances>`: number of instances to scale down (in `ingester` statefulset) and scale up (in `ingester-blocks`), or "all" – which will scale down all remaining instances in `ingester` statefulset

Author: ```suggestion
- `<num-instances>`: number of instances to scale down (in `ingester-old` statefulset) and scale up (in `ingester-new`), or "all" – which will scale down all remaining instances in `ingester-old` statefulset
```
